---
title: "Observations of Sediment Transport at a Tidal Wetland Restoration Site: Prime Hook National Wildlife Refuge, Delaware"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2018-12-01-AGU
venue: "American Geophysical Union Annual Meeting 2018"
date: 2018-12-01
location: "Washington, D.C."
---

Prime Hook National Wildlife Refuge in Delaware contains over 10,000 acres of wetlands along the coast of lower Delaware Bay. The refuge formerly contained two managed freshwater wetland impoundments, but starting in 2009 a series of coastal storms breached the coastal barrier and threatened the ecological integrity of the wetland complex. A restoration project was completed in 2016 to close the breaches and reintroduce regular tidal flow for the first time in decades. In this study we are conducting an observational study of sediment flux to develop a conceptual model of suspended-sediment transport and inform ongoing restoration efforts. Sediment transport and accumulation are critical to maintain newly created tidal flats and stabilize reestablishing salt marsh vegetation. Timeseries of continuous flow and sediment concentration data obtained at four tidal channel locations are being analyzed to identify mechanisms of sediment flux related to tides, wind stress, wave resuspension, and freshwater discharge. Preliminary results indicate that the post-restoration refuge behaves as a tidally choked coastal lagoon impacted by local and remote winds. Average suspended sediment concentrations (SSC) are high (80-130 mg/L) compared to typical tidal wetlands in the region (10-40m mg/L), perhaps due to resuspension of material from unvegetated tidal flats. Wind waves and rainfall contribute to channel bed and tidal flat resuspension, in addition to tidal stress. Tidally averaged net fluxes of sediment between the refuge and contiguous waterways are driven by tidal current asymmetries and sediment scour/settling lag effects. These asymmetries are time-dependent, varying between fairweather conditions and storm events. In addition to tidal transport, freshwater runoff from the watershed appears to drive a weak export of sediment from the refuge. 
